Documenting how to use EvenPodsSpread feature (#15514)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/configuration/even-pods-spread.md

```

So the cluster is logically viewed as below:

```
+---------------+---------------+
|     zoneA     |     zoneB     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

Instead of manually applying labels, you can also reuse the [standardized Kubernetes labels](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/labels-annotations-taints/) which are created automatically along with the cluster provisioning.

## Usage

### API

A new `pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints` API is introduced as below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: mypod
spec:
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: <integer>
    topologyKey: <string>
    whenUnsatisfiable: <string>
    labelSelector: <object>
```

You can define one or multiple `topologySpreadConstraint` to instruct the kube-scheduler to how to place the incoming pod with existing pods across the cluster. In particular, the fields are explained as below:

- **maxSkew** describes the degree to which pods may be unevenly distributed. It's the maximum permitted difference between the number of matching pods in any two topology domains of a given topology type.

> - **topologyKey** is the key of node labels. Nodes that have a label with this key and identical values are considered to be in the same topology. We consider each <key, value> as a "bucket", and try to put a balanced number of pods into each bucket.

Author: That is mentioned in other sections.

- **whenUnsatisfiable** indicates how to deal with a pod if it doesn't satisfy the spread constraint:
    - `DoNotSchedule` (default) tells the scheduler not to schedule it
    - `ScheduleAnyway` tells the scheduler to still schedule it

> - **labelSelector** is used to find matching pods. Pods that match this label selector are counted to determine the number of pods in their corresponding topology domain.

Author: SG.

## Usage

### API

A new `pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints` API is introduced as below:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: mypod
spec:
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: <integer>
    topologyKey: <string>
    whenUnsatisfiable: <string>
    labelSelector: <object>
```

You can define one or multiple `topologySpreadConstraint` to instruct the kube-scheduler how to place the incoming pod with existing pods across the cluster. In particular, the fields are explained as below:

- **maxSkew** describes the degree to which pods may be unevenly distributed. It's the maximum permitted difference between the number of matching pods in any two topology domains of a given topology type. It must be greater than zero.
- **topologyKey** is the key of node labels. Nodes that have a label with this key and identical values are considered to be in the same topology. We consider each <key, value> as a "bucket", and try to put a balanced number of pods into each bucket.
- **whenUnsatisfiable** indicates how to deal with a pod if it doesn't satisfy the spread constraint:
    - `DoNotSchedule` (default) tells the scheduler not to schedule it.

>     - `ScheduleAnyway` tells the scheduler to still schedule it in the manner of prioritizing nodes that minimize the skew.

Reviewer: s/in the manner of/while

- **labelSelector** is used to find matching pods. Pods that match this label selector are counted to determine the number of pods in their corresponding topology domain. See [Lable Selectors](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#label-selectors) for more details.

Detailed API explanation can also be found via `kubectl explain pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints`.

### Example: One TopologySpreadConstraint

> Suppose we have a 4-node cluster where 3 pods labeled `foo:bar` are located from node1 to node3 respectively (`P` represents Pod):

Reviewer: s/from node1 to node3 respectively/in node1, node2 and node3

| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|   P   |   P   |   P   |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

We can use 2 TopologySpreadConstraints to control the pods spreading on both zone and node:

```
kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: mypod
  labels:
    foo: bar
spec:
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: zone
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: node
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
...
```

In this case, to match the first constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "node4". Then the results of 2 constraints are ANDed, so we get the only option "node4".

Be aware that multiple constraints can sometimes lead to conflicts. Suppose we have a 3-node cluster across 2 zones:

```
+---------------+-------+
|     zoneA     | zoneB |
+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 |  nod3 |
+-------+-------+-------+
|  P P  |   P   |  P P  |
+-------+-------+-------+
```

> If we apply "mypod.yaml" to this cluster, you will notice "mypod" stays in `Pending` state. This is because: to satisfy the first constraint, "mypod" can only be put to "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, "mypod" can only put to "node2". Then a joint result of "zoneB" and "node2" returns nothing.

Reviewer: "mypod.yaml" as a file is not defined before, so perhaps say: "If we try to create _mypod_ as defined above"

Author: I will include it as a standalone .yaml file later.

To overcome this situation, you can either increase the `maxSkew` or modify one of the constraints to use `whenUnsatisfiable: ScheduleAnyway`.

### Conventions

There are some implicit conventions worth noting here:

- Only the pods holding the same namespace as the incoming pod can be matching candidates.

> - Nodes without `topologySpreadConstraints[*].topologyKey` present will be bypassed - i.e. the pods located on those nodes being disregarded. In the above example, suppose a node5 carrying label `{zone-typo: zoneC}` joins the cluster, it will be bypassed due to the absence of label key `zone`.

Reviewer: s/i.e. the pods located on those nodes being disregarded/i.e., pods scheduled on those nodes do not impact maxSkew calculation

Reviewer: when you say bypassed, does this also mean that the node will be filtered (i.e., the incoming pod will not be scheduled on it), if yes we should clarify that as well?

Author: You're right, it means both (1) pods on those nodes won't impact maxSkew calculation, and (2) the incoming pod won't be scheduled onto this kind of nodes.

> - Be aware of what happends if the incomingPod’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` doesn’t match its own labels. In the above example, if we remove the incoming pod’s labels, it can still be placed onto "zoneB" since the constraints are respected well. However, after the placement, the degree of imbalance of the cluster remains unchanged - it’s still zoneA having 2 pods which hold label {foo:bar}, and zoneB having 1 pod which holds label {foo:bar}. So if this is not what you expect, we recommend the workload’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` to match its own labels.

Reviewer: s/respected well/still satisfied

---

> title: Even Pods Spread

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Pod spread constraints
```
The feature gate is EvenPodsSpread; the _concept_ is Pod spread. Have I got that right?

Reviewer 2: I'd expect to find this page inside https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/

Author: How about "Pod topology spread constraints"?

content_template: templates/concept
weight: 50
---

{{% capture overview %}}

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.16" state="alpha" >}}

> This page explains how EvenPodsSpread feature works and the mechanics under the hood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use _spread constraints_ to control how Pods are spread across your cluster among failure-domains such as regions, zones, nodes, and other user-defined topology domains. This can help to achieve high availability as well as efficient resource utilization.
```

Reviewer 2: Also consider using a glossary tooltip for Pods: `{{< glossary_tooltip text="Pods" term_id="pod" >}}`

Author: It's more precise to use "topology spread constraints".

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture body %}}

## EvenPodsSpread

> `EvenPodsSpread` feature gives users more fine-grained control on the pods' distribution across the cluster among failure-domains such as regions, zones, nodes, and other user-defined topology domains. This can help to achieve high availability as well as efficient resource utilization.

Reviewer 2: Some of this belongs in the page overview. When revising, consider these tweaks:
```suggestion
To use _spread constraints_, you need to enable the `EvenPodsSpread` https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/).
```

Author: We can simply remove this section as the content has been moved to the "overview" section.

## Motivation

> In Kubernetes, "Affinity" related directives are aimed to control how pods are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, directives related to “Affinity” control how Pods are
```

> scheduled - more packed or more scattered. But right now only limited options

Reviewer 2: [Avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future) as per the style guide.

Author: +100 on this! Didn't know we have this guide.

> are offered: for `PodAffinity`, infinite pods can be packed into qualifying

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 are offered: for `PodAffinity`, you can try to pack any number of Pods into qualifying
```

topology domain(s); for `PodAntiAffinity`, only one pod can be scheduled into a
single topology domain.

This is not an ideal situation if users want to distribute pods evenly across different
topology domains - to achieve high availability or cost-saving. And
regular rolling upgrade or scaling out replicas can also be problematic.

> ## Set up

Reviewer 2: I recommend switching this Set up section into a new Task page.

Author: Hmm.. Actually, this is not a serious "set up" section. Maybe reword to "Prerequisites"?

### Enable Feature Gate

Ensure the `EvenPodsSpread` feature gate is enabled (it is disabled by default
in 1.16). See [Feature Gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for an explanation of enabling feature gates. The `EvenPodsSpread` feature gate must be enabled on apiserver **and** scheduler.

### Apply Labels to Worker Nodes

This feature requires the nodes to be labelled with topological key-value pairs via `kubectl label node <node_name> <key1=val1> <key2=val2> ...`. For example, the following 4-node cluster is tagged with {node: node_name>, zone: zone_name}:

```

> $ kubectl get node --show-labels

Reviewer 2: Per the style guide:
- avoid putting the prompt into shell snippets
- separate the command from its sample output

NAME    STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION   LABELS
node1   Ready    <none>   4m26s   v1.16.0   node=node1,zone=zoneA
node2   Ready    <none>   3m58s   v1.16.0   node=node2,zone=zoneA
node3   Ready    <none>   3m17s   v1.16.0   node=node3,zone=zoneB
node4   Ready    <none>   2m43s   v1.16.0   node=node4,zone=zoneB
```

So the cluster is logically viewed as below:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Would it help to have a proper diagram here? I might be able to help draw that.

Author: A diagram _can_ help. I'm just thinking of text styled diagram, which should be enough and portable.

+---------------+---------------+
|     zoneA     |     zoneB     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

> Instead of manually applying labels, you can also reuse the [standardized Kubernetes labels](/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/labels-annotations-taints/) which are created and populated automatically by most cluster providers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of manually applying labels, you can also reuse the [well-known labels](/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/labels-annotations-taints/) that are created and populated automatically on most clusters.
```

## Usage

### API

> A new `pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints` API is introduced as below:

Reviewer 2: Similar to [avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future), be cautious about making statements about the present.

- **topologyKey** is the key of node labels. Nodes that have a label with this key and identical values are considered to be in the same topology. We consider each <key, value> as a "bucket", and try to put a balanced number of pods into each bucket.
- **whenUnsatisfiable** indicates how to deal with a pod if it doesn't satisfy the spread constraint:
    - `DoNotSchedule` (default) tells the scheduler not to schedule it.
    - `ScheduleAnyway` tells the scheduler to still schedule it while prioritizing nodes that minimize the skew.
- **labelSelector** is used to find matching pods. Pods that match this label selector are counted to determine the number of pods in their corresponding topology domain. See [Lable Selectors](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#label-selectors) for more details.

Detailed API explanation can also be found via `kubectl explain pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints`.

### Example: One TopologySpreadConstraint

> Suppose we have a 4-node cluster where 3 pods labeled `foo:bar` are located in node1, node2 and node3 respectively (`P` represents Pod):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose you have a 4-node cluster where 3 pods labeled `foo:bar` are located in node1, node2 and node3 respectively (`P` represents Pod):
```

```
+---------------+---------------+
|     zoneA     |     zoneB     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|   P   |   P   |   P   |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

If we want an incoming pod to be evenly spread with existing pods across zones, the spec can be given as:

```
kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: mypod
  labels:
    foo: bar
spec:
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: zone
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
...
```

`topologyKey: zone` implies the even distribution will only be applied to the nodes which have label pair "zone:<any value>" present.  And `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule` tells the scheduler to let it stay pending if the incoming pod can’t satisfy the constraint.

> If we place the pod onto "zoneA", the pods distribution would become [3, 1], hence the actual skew is 2 (3 - 1) which violates `maxSkew: 1`, so in this example, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "zoneB":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the control plane places the incoming Pod onto "zoneA", the pods distribution would become [3, 1], hence the actual skew is 2 (3 - 1) which violates `maxSkew: 1`. In this example, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "zoneB":
```

Author: We can just say:

> If the Pod is placed into "zoneA"

BTW: "onto", or "into"? Any suggestion?

```
+---------------+---------------+      +---------------+---------------+
|     zoneA     |     zoneB     |      |     zoneA     |     zoneB     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+      +-------+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |  OR  | node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+      +-------+-------+-------+-------+
|   P   |   P   |   P   |   P   |      |   P   |   P   |  P P  |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+      +-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

> We can tweak the pod spec to meet various kinds of requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can tweak the pod spec to meet various kinds of requirements:
```

- Change `maxSkew` to a bigger value like "2" so that the incoming pod can be placed onto "zoneA" as well.
- Change `topologyKey` to "node" so as to distribute the pods evenly across nodes instead of zones. In the above example, if `maxSkew` remains "1", the incoming pod can only be placed onto "node4".
- Change `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule` to `whenUnsatisfiable: ScheduleAnyway` to ensure the incoming pod to be always schedulable (suppose other scheduling APIs are satisfied). However, it’s preferred to be placed onto the topology domain which has fewer matching pods. (Be aware that this preferability is jointly normalized with other internal scheduling priorities like resource usage ratio, etc.)

### Example: Multiple TopologySpreadConstraints

> Let’s reuse the above example: suppose we have a 4-node cluster where 3 pods labeled `foo:bar` are located from node1 to node3 respectively (`P` represents Pod):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This builds upon the previous example. Suppose you have a 4-node cluster where 3 pods labeled `foo:bar` are located from node1 to node3 respectively (`P` represents Pod):
```

```
+---------------+---------------+
|     zoneA     |     zoneB     |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|   P   |   P   |   P   |       |
+-------+-------+-------+-------+
```

> We can use 2 TopologySpreadConstraints to control the pods spreading on both zone and node:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use 2 TopologySpreadConstraints to control the pods spreading on both zone and node:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: nit: Mark this as YAML

kind: Pod
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: mypod
  labels:
    foo: bar
spec:
  topologySpreadConstraints:
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: zone
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
  - maxSkew: 1
    topologyKey: node
    whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
    labelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
...
```

> In this case, to match the first constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "node4". Then the results of 2 constraints are ANDed, so we get the only option "node4".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, to match the first constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, the incoming pod can only be placed onto "node4". Then the results of 2 constraints are ANDed, so the only viable option is to place on "node4".
```

> Be aware that multiple constraints can sometimes lead to conflicts. Suppose we have a 3-node cluster across 2 zones:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple constraints can lead to conflicts. Suppose you have a 3-node cluster across 2 zones:
```

```
+---------------+-------+
|     zoneA     | zoneB |
+-------+-------+-------+
| node1 | node2 |  nod3 |
+-------+-------+-------+
|  P P  |   P   |  P P  |
+-------+-------+-------+
```

> If we apply "mypod.yaml" to this cluster, you will notice "mypod" stays in `Pending` state. This is because: to satisfy the first constraint, "mypod" can only be put to "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, "mypod" can only put to "node2". Then a joint result of "zoneB" and "node2" returns nothing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you apply "mypod.yaml" to this cluster, you will notice "mypod" stays in `Pending` state. This is because: to satisfy the first constraint, "mypod" can only be put to "zoneB"; while in terms of the second constraint, "mypod" can only put to "node2". Then a joint result of "zoneB" and "node2" returns nothing.
```

    2. the incoming pod has no chances to be scheduled onto this kind of nodes - in the above example, suppose a "node5" carrying label `{zone-typo: zoneC}` joins the cluster, it will be bypassed due to the absence of label key "zone".

- Be aware of what will happen if the incomingPod’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` doesn’t match its own labels. In the above example, if we remove the incoming pod’s labels, it can still be placed onto "zoneB" since the constraints are still satisfied. However, after the placement, the degree of imbalance of the cluster remains unchanged - it’s still zoneA having 2 pods which hold label {foo:bar}, and zoneB having 1 pod which holds label {foo:bar}. So if this is not what you expect, we recommend the workload’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` to match its own labels.

- If the incoming pod has `spec.nodeSelector` or `spec.affinity.nodeAffinity` defined, nodes not matching them will be bypassed.

>     Suppose we have a 5-node cluster ranging from zoneA to zoneC:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Suppose you have a 5-node cluster ranging from zoneA to zoneC:
```

    ```
    +---------------+---------------+-------+
    |     zoneA     |     zoneB     | zoneC |
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    | node1 | node2 | node3 | node4 | node5 |
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    |   P   |   P   |   P   |       |       |
    +-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
    ```

>     If we’re clear that zoneC must be excluded, we can compose the spec like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and you know that that zoneC must be excluded. In that case, you can compose the spec like this:
```

>     ```

Reviewer 2: nit: Mark this as YAML

To overcome this situation, you can either increase the `maxSkew` or modify one of the constraints to use `whenUnsatisfiable: ScheduleAnyway`.

> ### Conventions

Reviewer 3: I think this section should go before the examples.

Author: I'm ok either way. My original thought is that we should show some examples to give a general idea on this feature, and then explain some underlying conventions worthing noting.

Reviewer 3: sg

There are some implicit conventions worth noting here:

- Only the pods holding the same namespace as the incoming pod can be matching candidates.

- Nodes without `topologySpreadConstraints[*].topologyKey` present will be bypassed - i.e. the pods located on those nodes being disregarded. In the above example, suppose a node5 carrying label `{zone-typo: zoneC}` joins the cluster, it will be bypassed due to the absence of label key `zone`.

> - Be aware of what happends if the incomingPod’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` doesn’t match its own labels. In the above example, if we remove the incoming pod’s labels, it can still be placed onto "zoneB" since the constraints are respected well. However, after the placement, the degree of imbalance of the cluster remains unchanged - it’s still zoneA having 2 pods which hold label {foo:bar}, and zoneB having 1 pod which holds label {foo:bar}. So if this is not what you expect, we recommend the workload’s `topologySpreadConstraints[*].labelSelector` to match its own labels.

Reviewer 3: s/happends/happens

Reviewer 3: just this from my end
